= Biomart - Ensembl

GTF provides access to all annotated transcripts which make
up an Ensembl gene set. Annotation is based on alignments of
biological evidence (eg. proteins, cDNAs, RNA-seq) to a genome assembly.
The annotation dumped here is transcribed and translated from the
genome assembly and is not the original input sequence data that
we used for alignment. Therefore, the sequences provided by Ensembl
may differ from the original input sequence data where the genome
assembly is different to the aligned sequence.

Additionally, we provide a GTF file containing the predicted gene set
as generated by Genscan and other abinitio prediction tools.
This file is identified by the abinitio extension.

== FILE NAMES

The files are consistently named following this pattern:
   <species>.<assembly>.<version>.gtf.gz

<species>:       The systematic name of the species.
<assembly>:      The assembly build name.
<version>:       The version of Ensembl from which the data was exported.
gtf : All files in these directories are in GTF format
gz : All files are compacted with GNU Zip for storage efficiency.

e.g.
Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.81.gtf.gz

For the predicted gene set, an additional abinitio flag is added to the name file.
<species>.<assembly>.<version>.abinitio.gtf.gz

e.g.
Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.81.abinitio.gtf.gz

=== Definition and supported options

The GTF (General Transfer Format) is an extension of GFF version 2
and used to represent transcription models. GFF (General Feature Format)
consists of one line per feature, each containing 9 columns of data.

Fields

Fields are tab-separated. Also, all but the final field in each
feature line must contain a value; "empty" columns are denoted
with a '.'

- seqname   - name of the chromosome or scaffold; chromosome names without a 'chr'
- source    - name of the program that generated this feature, or
                the data source (database or project name)
    feature   - feature type name. Current allowed features are
                {gene, transcript, exon, CDS, Selenocysteine, start_codon,
                stop_codon and UTR}
    start     - start position of the feature, with sequence numbering
                starting at 1.
    end       - end position of the feature, with sequence numbering
                starting at 1.
    score     - a floating point value indiciating the score of a feature

    frame     - one of '0', '1' or '2'. Frame indicates the number of base pairs
                before you encounter a full codon. '0' indicates the feature
                begins with a whole codon. '1' indicates there is an extra
                base (the 3rd base of the prior codon) at the start of this feature.
                '2' indicates there are two extra bases (2nd and 3rd base of the
                prior exon) before the first codon. All values are given with
                relation to the 5' end.
    attribute - a semicolon-separated list of tag-value pairs (separated by a space),
                providing additional information about each feature. A key can be
                repeated multiple times.

Attributes

The following attributes are available. All attributes are semi-colon
separated pairs of keys and values.

- gene_id: The stable identifier for the gene
- gene_version: The stable identifier version for the gene
- gene_name: The official symbol of this gene
- gene_source: The annotation source for this gene
- gene_biotype: The biotype of this gene
- transcript_id: The stable identifier for this transcript
- transcript_version: The stable identifier version for this transcript
- transcript_name: The symbold for this transcript derived from the gene name
- transcript_source: The annotation source for this transcript
- transcript_biotype: The biotype for this transcript
- exon_id: The stable identifier for this exon
- exon_version: The stable identifier version for this exon
- exon_number: Position of this exon in the transcript
- ccds_id: CCDS identifier linked to this transcript
- protein_id: Stable identifier for this transcript's protein
- protein_version: Stable identifier version for this transcript's protein
- tag: A collection of additional key value tags
- transcript_support_level: Ranking to assess how well a transcript is supported (from 1 to 5)

Tags

Tags are additional flags used to indicate attibutes of the transcript.

- CCDS: Flags this transcript as one linked to a CCDS record
- seleno: Flags this transcript has a Selenocysteine edit. Look for the Selenocysteine
feature for the position of this on the genome
- cds_end_NF: the coding region end could not be confirmed
- cds_start_NF: the coding region start could not be confirmed
- mRNA_end_NF: the mRNA end could not be confirmed
- mRNA_start_NF: the mRNA start could not be confirmed.
- basic: the transcript is part of the gencode basic geneset

Comments

Lines may be commented out by the addition of a single # character at the start. These
lines should be ignored by your parser.

Pragmas/Metadata

GTF files can contain meta-data. In the case of experimental meta-data these are
noted by a #!. Those which are stable are noted by a ##. Meta data is a single key,
a space and then the value. Current meta data keys are:

* genome-build -  Build identifier of the assembly e.g. GRCh37.p11
* genome-version - Version of this assembly e.g. GRCh37
* genome-date - The date of this assembly's release e.g. 2009-02
* genome-build-accession - The accession and source of this accession e.g. NCBI:GCA_000001405.14
* genebuild-last-updated - The date of the last genebuild update e.g. 2013-09

------------------
Example GTF output
------------------

#!genome-build GRCh38
11      ensembl_havana  gene    5422111 5423206 .       +       .       gene_id "ENSG00000167360"; gene_version "4"; gene_name "OR51Q1"; gene_source "ensembl_havana"; gene_biotype "protein_coding";
11      ensembl_havana  transcript      5422111 5423206 .       +       .       gene_id "ENSG00000167360"; gene_version "4"; transcript_id "ENST00000300778"; transcript_version "4"; gene_name "OR51Q1"; gene_source "ensembl_havana"; gene_biotype "protein_coding"; transcript_name "OR51Q1-001"; transcript_source "ensembl_havana"; transcript_biotype "protein_coding"; tag "CCDS"; ccds_id "CCDS31381";
11      ensembl_havana  exon    5422111 5423206 .       +       .       gene_id "ENSG00000167360"; gene_version "4"; transcript_id "ENST00000300778"; transcript_version "4"; exon_number "1"; gene_name "OR51Q1"; gene_source "ensembl_havana"; gene_biotype "protein_coding"; transcript_name "OR51Q1-001"; transcript_source "ensembl_havana"; transcript_biotype "protein_coding"; tag "CCDS"; ccds_id "CCDS31381"; exon_id "ENSE00001276439"; exon_version "4";
11      ensembl_havana  CDS     5422201 5423151 .       +       0       gene_id "ENSG00000167360"; gene_version "4"; transcript_id "ENST00000300778"; transcript_version "4"; exon_number "1"; gene_name "OR51Q1"; gene_source "ensembl_havana"; gene_biotype "protein_coding"; transcript_name "OR51Q1-001"; transcript_source "ensembl_havana"; transcript_biotype "protein_coding"; tag "CCDS"; ccds_id "CCDS31381"; protein_id "ENSP00000300778"; protein_version "4";
11      ensembl_havana  start_codon     5422201 5422203 .       +       0       gene_id "ENSG00000167360"; gene_version "4"; transcript_id "ENST00000300778"; transcript_version "4"; exon_number "1"; gene_name "OR51Q1"; gene_source "ensembl_havana"; gene_biotype "protein_coding"; transcript_name "OR51Q1-001"; transcript_source "ensembl_havana"; transcript_biotype "protein_coding"; tag "CCDS"; ccds_id "CCDS31381";
11      ensembl_havana  stop_codon      5423152 5423154 .       +       0       gene_id "ENSG00000167360"; gene_version "4"; transcript_id "ENST00000300778"; transcript_version "4"; exon_number "1"; gene_name "OR51Q1"; gene_source "ensembl_havana"; gene_biotype "protein_coding"; transcript_name "OR51Q1-001"; transcript_source "ensembl_havana"; transcript_biotype "protein_coding"; tag "CCDS"; ccds_id "CCDS31381";
11      ensembl_havana  UTR     5422111 5422200 .       +       .       gene_id "ENSG00000167360"; gene_version "4"; transcript_id "ENST00000300778"; transcript_version "4"; gene_name "OR51Q1"; gene_source "ensembl_havana"; gene_biotype "protein_coding"; transcript_name "OR51Q1-001"; transcript_source "ensembl_havana"; transcript_biotype "protein_coding"; tag "CCDS"; ccds_id "CCDS31381";
11      ensembl_havana  UTR     5423155 5423206 .       +       .       gene_id "ENSG00000167360"; gene_version "4"; transcript_id "ENST00000300778"; transcript_version "4"; gene_name "OR51Q1"; gene_source "ensembl_havana"; gene_biotype "protein_coding"; transcript_name "OR51Q1-001"; transcript_source "ensembl_havana"; transcript_biotype "protein_coding"; tag "CCDS"; ccds_id "CCDS31381";




== Biotypes
Biotype: A gene or transcript classification.
- IG gene: Immunoglobulin gene that undergoes somatic recombination, annotated in collaboration with IMGT http://www.imgt.org/.
	- IG C gene: Constant chain immunoglobulin gene that undergoes somatic recombination before transcription
	- IG D gene: Diversity chain immunoglobulin gene that undergoes somatic recombination before transcription
	- IG J gene: Joining chain immunoglobulin gene that undergoes somatic recombination before transcription
	- IG V gene: Variable chain immunoglobulin gene that undergoes somatic recombination before transcription

- Nonsense Mediated Decay: A transcript with a premature stop codon considered likely to be subjected to targeted degradation. Nonsense-Mediated Decay is predicted to be triggered where the in-frame termination codon is found more than 50bp upstream of the final splice junction.
- Processed transcript: Gene/transcript that doesn't contain an open reading frame (ORF).
- Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA): A non-coding gene/transcript >200bp in length
- 3' overlapping ncRNA: Transcripts where ditag and/or published experimental data strongly supports the existence of long (>200bp) non-coding transcripts that overlap the 3'UTR of a protein-coding locus on the same strand.
- Antisense: Transcripts that overlap the genomic span (i.e. exon or introns) of a protein-coding locus on the opposite strand.
- Macro lncRNA: Unspliced lncRNAs that are several kb in size.
- Non coding: Transcripts which are known from the literature to not be protein coding.
- Retained intron: An alternatively spliced transcript believed to contain intronic sequence relative to other, coding, transcripts of the same gene.
- Sense intronic: A long non-coding transcript in introns of a coding gene that does not overlap any exons.
- Sense overlapping: A long non-coding transcript that contains a coding gene in its intron on the same strand.
- lincRNA (long intergenic ncRNA): Transcripts that are long intergenic non-coding RNA locus with a length >200bp. Requires lack of coding potential and may not be conserved between species.
- ncRNA: A non-coding gene.
- miRNA: A small RNA (~22bp) that silences the expression of target mRNA.
- miscRNA: Miscellaneous RNA. A non-coding RNA that cannot be classified.
- piRNA: An RNA that interacts with piwi proteins involved in genetic silencing.
- rRNA: The RNA component of a ribosome.
- siRNA: A small RNA (20-25bp) that silences the expression of target mRNA through the RNAi pathway.
- snRNA: Small RNA molecules that are found in the cell nucleus and are involved in the processing of pre messenger RNAs
- snoRNA: Small RNA molecules that are found in the cell nucleolus and are involved in the post-transcriptional modification of other RNAs.
- tRNA: A transfer RNA, which acts as an adaptor molecule for translation of mRNA.
- vaultRNA: Short non coding RNA genes that form part of the vault ribonucleoprotein complex.
- Protein coding: Gene/transcipt that contains an open reading frame (ORF).
- Pseudogene: A gene that has homology to known protein-coding genes but contain a frameshift and/or stop codon(s) which disrupts the ORF. Thought to have arisen through duplication followed by loss of function.
- IG pseudogene: Inactivated immunoglobulin gene.
- Polymorphic pseudogene: Pseudogene owing to a SNP/indel but in other individuals/haplotypes/strains the gene is translated.
- Processed pseudogene: Pseudogene that lack introns and is thought to arise from reverse transcription of mRNA followed by reinsertion of DNA into the genome.
- Transcribed pseudogene: Pseudogene where protein homology or genomic structure indicates a pseudogene, but the presence of locus-specific transcripts indicates expression. These can be classified into 'Processed', 'Unprocessed' and 'Unitary'.
- Translated pseudogene: Pseudogenes that have mass spec data suggesting that they are also translated. These can be classified into 'Processed', 'Unprocessed'
- Unitary pseudogene: A species specific unprocessed pseudogene without a parent gene, as it has an active orthologue in another species.
- Unprocessed pseudogene: Pseudogene that can contain introns since produced by gene duplication.
- Readthrough: A readthrough transcript has exons that overlap exons from transcripts belonging to two or more different loci (in addition to the locus to which the readthrough transcript itself belongs).
- Stop codon readthrough: The coding sequence contains a stop codon that is translated (as supported by experimental evidence), and termination occurs instead at a canonical stop codon further downstream. It is currently unknown which codon is used to replace the translated stop codon, hence it is represented by 'X' in the protein sequence
- TEC (To be Experimentally Confirmed): Regions with EST clusters that have polyA features that could indicate the presence of protein coding genes. These require experimental validation, either by 5' RACE or RT-PCR to extend the transcripts, or by confirming expression of the putatively-encoded peptide with specific antibodies.
- TR gene: T cell receptor gene that undergoes somatic recombination, annotated in collaboration with IMGT http://www.imgt.org/.
- TR C gene: Constant chain T cell receptor gene that undergoes somatic recombination before transcription
- TR D gene: Diversity chain T cell receptor gene that undergoes somatic recombination before transcription
- TR J gene: Joining chain T cell receptor gene that undergoes somatic recombination before transcription
- TR V gene: Variable chain T cell receptor gene that undergoes somatic recombination before transcription
-
